Risk Management Concepts

While reviewing risk management concepts, it is critical to remember that the ultimate purpose of information security is to reduce risks to organizational assets to levels that are deemed acceptable by senior management. Information security should not be performed using a “secure at any cost” approach. The cost of controls should never exceed the loss that would result if the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of a system were compromised. Risks, threats, vulnerabilities, and potential impacts should be assessed. Only after assessing these factors can cost-effective information security controls be selected and implemented that eliminate or reduce risks to acceptable levels.
Key Terms

We will use the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication 800-30 R1, “Risk Management Guide for Information Systems,” as a baseline document for establishing definitions of key risk management concepts.

■■ Risk: A function of the likelihood of a given threat source exercising a potential vulnerability, and the resulting impact of that adverse event on the organization.

■■ Likelihood: The probability that a potential vulnerability may be exercised within the construct of the associated threat environment.

■■ Threat Source: Either intent and method targeted at the intentional exploitation of a vulnerability or a situation or method that may accidentally trigger a vulnerability.

■■ Threat: The potential for a threat source to exercise (accidentally trigger or intentionally exploit) a specific vulnerability.

Key Terms

■■ Vulnerability: A flaw or weakness in system security procedures, design, implementation, or internal controls that could be exercised (accidentally triggered or intentionally exploited) and result in a security breach or a violation of the system’s security policy.

■■ Impact: The magnitude of harm that could be caused by a threat’s exercise of a vulnerability.

■■ Asset: Anything of value that is owned by an organization. Assets include both tangible items, such as information systems and physical property, and intangible assets, such as intellectual property.